%================================================
%====== Chapter 6, Conclusions
%================================================

\pagestyle{newchap}
\chapter{Conclusions} \label{chapter-conclusions}

In this report we have proposed \textit{pythonrv}, in which we write runtime
verification specifications in the programming language Python and in a manner
more similar to unit testing. Our approach utilizes the dynamic nature of
Python to do instrumentation. We use decorators to mark what functions should
be monitored for a specification, and reflection to deduce the properties of
the monitorees.

However, our approach would work in other programming languages as well if they
support hot-swapping of code --- replacing objects during runtime, injecting
wrapping code around the functions to monitor.

We have also implemented support in \textit{pythonrv} for formal verification.
The formal specifications are written in a subset of Python, which is given a
formal semantics (see Section~\ref{section-approach-formal-foundation}).

A few reservations should be mentioned, however.

The specifications' explicit dealing with time and the actual execution flow
leads to some inherent divergences from ordinary unit testing styles. This is
best exemplified by the \texttt{event.next} method described in
Chapter~\ref{chapter-approach}.

Giving the specifications a formal foundation, and doing formal verification
with them, has been difficult, due to the fact that the chosen programming
language, Python, does not have a formal semantics defined. We define the
formal semantics for a subset of Python, which makes the math easier, but the
resulting syntax less interesting --- it requires a lot of boilerplate for even
the simplest of specifications.


\section{Future Work}

The \textit{pythonrv} framework is just a prototype, and should be seen as a
first step of several to using a unit test-like specification syntax for
runtime verification. Here are a few ideas on what could be improved.

The testing technique called expectations, as described in
Section~\ref{section-expectations}, might fit quite well with the
\textit{pythonrv} style of writing specifications. This could allow for a
cleaner and more succinct way to describe temporal properties, perhaps in many
cases obviating the need to use the \texttt{event.next} method.

The \textit{f-pythonrv} formal specification framework could do with more
work on the specification language. The current approach should be adjusted to
work more like the informal specification language.

The performance of the implementation has not been measured or considered in
much detail. Benchmark tests for \textit{pythonrv} would be interesting, as
would attempts to introduce it as a correctness verification approach for more
programs.

Offline verification, discussed in Section~\ref{section-rv} and
Section~\ref{section-approach-verification}, would be interesting. A simple way
to turn verification on or off, or to switch between online and offline, would
be useful. For instance, when a bug has been found, RV could be turned on for
further verification and help in finding the erroneous code.

If the verification parts of \textit{pythonrv} are unwanted, \textit{pythonrv}
could be used as a simple framework for aspect-oriented programming.
Self-healing and self-adaptation would be a very interesting use case. Extracting
logging functionality into separate modules, written as \textit{pythonrv}
specifications, could make the separation of concerns in the program clearer.

It would be interesting to investigate how the approach we have used in this
report would work in languages beside Python. Both JavaScript and Ruby, for
instance, support hot-swapping of code, but an implementation of
\textit{pythonrv} in those languages would result in rather different-looking
applications, due to the underlying workings of those languages.


\section{Final Words}

The trend of software systems in general seems to be toward larger and more
complex entities. This makes the automated verification of program
correctness, formal or not, ever more important and an essential part of
software development. Runtime verification could have a place there, if it
becomes more popular and simpler to integrate and use in ordinary software.

The implementation described in this report, \textit{pythonrv}, is publicly
available on the web\footnote{\texttt{https://github.com/tgwizard/pythonrv}} as
free, open source software. People are welcome to try it, incorporate it into
their programs, and extend it, as they see fit. With enough interest,
\textit{pythonrv} might mature into a solid framework for runtime verification.

